OS Security Checklist Document
Objective

The objective of this task is to understand operating system (OS) security by exploring user accounts, permissions, firewall settings, running services, and basic OS hardening practices to reduce the attack surface.

1. Operating System Setup

Installed a Linux Virtual Machine using VirtualBox
(Alternatively, Windows OS security settings can also be used)

Ensured the OS is updated with the latest security patches.

2. User Accounts & Access Control

Identified different user accounts available in the OS.

Understood role-based access control:

Administrator (root) user

Standard (normal) user

Limited administrative access only to trusted users.

Followed the principle of least privilege (users get only required permissions).

3. File Permissions in Linux

Learned and practiced Linux file permission commands:

ls -l → Used to view file permissions

chmod → Used to change file permissions

chown → Used to change file ownership

Permission Types

Read (r) – view file contents

Write (w) – modify file

Execute (x) – run file

Permission Levels

Owner

Group

Others

4. Administrator vs Standard User

Administrator (root):

Full system access

Can install software and modify system files

Standard User:

Limited access

Cannot make critical system changes

✔ Using standard users for daily activities improves security.

5. Firewall Configuration

Enabled UFW (Uncomplicated Firewall) in Linux
(or Windows Defender Firewall in Windows)

Firewall Benefits

Blocks unauthorized network access

Allows only trusted ports and services

Protects the system from network-based attacks

6. Running Processes & Services

Identified running processes using system monitoring tools.

Checked active services running in the background.

Why this is important

Some services may run unnecessarily

Unused services increase attack surface

7. Disabling Unnecessary Services

Identified services not required for system functionality.

Disabled unused or insecure services.

Reduced exposure to potential exploits.

✔ Fewer services = smaller attack surface.

8. OS Hardening Best Practices

Keep OS and software updated

Use strong passwords

Disable unused ports and services

Enable firewall

Use antivirus/anti-malware tools

Regularly review user permissions

Avoid running applications as root/admin

Enable logging and monitoring
